Nick Crane, Software Engineer at Voltron Data
Hello, my name is Nick Crane, I'm a software engineer at Voltron Data
and I'm also one of the maintainers on the Apache Arrow project.
I work mainly on the R package.
I started learning R about 12 years ago
and I just got so excited about the idea of open source.
I went from being this passive consumer of software
to now having this thing that I could pull apart.
It was like seeing the Matrix, seeing inside all these functions and things like that.
But despite that being quite a while ago,
it took me about six more years, I'd say,
to really start to connect with the R communities
and another few years on top of that to make my first contribution.
So what I want to talk to you about today is the things that got in my way
and stopped me getting involved with contributing to open source a bit sooner
when I probably actually could have
and actually it's been so beneficial to me,
I almost wish I had sooner.
But first, so in the way that everybody does science,
I wanted to do a Twitter poll.
So question for my RStats folks who have contributed to open source,
how many years had you been using open source libraries for
before you made your first contribution?
And actually it was pretty interesting to see
that it was pretty nice to see that for most people pretty soon actually,
two to three years of using open source libraries
before they kind of really got involved.
But actually, you know, it's quite a lot of people
in a similar situation to I was
where six more years before they really kind of made that first leap.
So I'm going to start off just by talking about
kind of why I contribute to open source
and the benefits it's had for me.
But before I go into that, I just want to start with a bit of disclaimer.
I'm not saying that contributing to open source
is necessary to be a good software engineer or a good data scientist.
It's absolutely not.
I think there's a certain amount of privilege
being involved with even having the time to do so alongside everything else.
So that's not what I'm going for here.
But going back to kind of like what I've gotten out
of contributing to open source,
I feel like it's been the best learning experience of my career.
Definitely kind of, you know, contributing kind of code
and non-code things and getting feedback from people
has been the biggest acceleration of my development as a software engineer.
Working in public is great.
You know, I figure out something that's taken me ages
and I blog about it and then somebody's like,
okay, I get it now, really rewarding.
And again, it's great to be part of a community.
I think as well, it's great to have that proof of your skills.
Like, I'm not the most necessarily confident person as a software engineer,
but having those sort of bragging rights, you know,
like I've kind of made those contributions to that project,
okay, well, I guess I must know what I'm doing some of the time then.
And also just like giving back to projects that have helped me in my work before.
Okay, so that's kind of the benefits.
But what are the kind of things that have kind of maybe got in my way
or some quite common complaints?
So like, I think one of the flip sides of open source
being this kind of massive network of self-governing communities
is that it has been quite kind of okay in some bits
to, you know, have kind of quite strong personalities
and people kind of not behaving amazingly in some bits anyway.
So I think I definitely have that question, you know,
are people going to be friendly or mean?
There's also the question of not knowing how.
So I was at a point where I could write functions
and even write R packages,
but I've not made a pull request for a project yet.
Other questions are things like,
what if I don't have the skills to do this?
What if I don't know where to start?
And even just that fear that like working in public is scary.
I get to share my successes,
but I also kind of share my failures a bit.
So just to get kind of one barrier out of the way,
if it's literally just the process of how do I make a pull request
to a project that is stopping me from contributing to open source,
I'd say please do check out the first contributions repo
that's kind of looked after by forwards.
So I was involved in kind of making the R version of this.
And basically it takes you through the process
of making a pull request.
So if you already know a bit of Git and know how to use GitHub,
that is all you need to kind of just walk through
the kind of mechanical steps for it.
But actually I think the things that really hold people back
from getting involved aren't kind of the actual process things,
and it's more these kind of concerns or worries.
So like the main bulk of this talk is going to be basically
about things that I now know that I wish I'd known before.
Okay, so the first big question I had is how to pick where to get involved
and what to work on.
And I think this is just really complicated
by maybe the view that I had of open source.
And I really had this kind of slightly misguided view at first
that open source is one big community.
And that's just not true.
There are lots of open source sub-communities.
And even within languages, within R, we see this, right?
But I think even kind of stepping back from that,
kind of my next view of open source wasn't quite right either.
So to kind of illustrate it,
so this is a screenshot from the movie Mean Girls.
Now, if you've not seen that,
I'm sure everybody at some point has seen some TV show or movie
where you've got this kind of like American high school cafeteria
and the new kids walking through,
and it's like, are these people going to let me sit at their table or are they not?
And that feeling of, you know, these people are kind of mean
and these people are kind of nice and things like that.
And this metaphor completely breaks down because everybody's nerds here.
But the point was like kind of viewing it as these people are mean
and awful and these people are lovely over here isn't quite right.
I think with a lot of projects, it's easy to forget,
like a lot of projects are kind of staffed by volunteers.
There's a lot of reasons why kind of some projects
just don't want new contributors.
So they might be going through a design phase.
They might just be really small.
And it does take effort to onboard a new contributor.
So I kind of came to realize that is okay.
But then, of course, like the next obvious question is,
so if some projects don't want new contributors,
then how do I find the ones that do?
And actually that was way easier to answer than I thought.
So they'll tell you.
So, for example, this is an issue from the Arrow project.
This is one that we've labeled good first issue to say, you know,
this is a good place to get started, get involved.
And again, similarly, here's, I think this is an old one,
but this is from dplyr.
And it's been labeled both good first issue and help wanted,
like clear signaling, like we want people to get involved here.
I will say, like projects that don't have these labels,
it doesn't mean they don't want new contributors.
But if this is a concern of yours,
this is kind of an easy way to kind of figure it out.
So the next question I guess then that I had is what to contribute.
And I think commonly given advice that I think is good advice
is all about starting small, build up trust, you know,
show people you've read the guidelines and you can kind of like
go from small things and bigger from there.
I think one thing that was really important for me, though, actually,
is it is way easier to contribute to packages
that you use yourself.
So my first contribution was to the broom package,
and that went well in everything, but there were points
during that kind of code contribution where I was like,
I don't know if I can change this because I wasn't a regular user
of the package.
And it would have been much easier if it was something
that I had a bit more kind of day-to-day use with.
And of course, like if you found problems in packages
or bugs that you've experienced yourself,
that's a really great place to get involved,
kind of figuring out what's going on, fixing it,
making a pull request.
Equally with documentation you find unclear,
I feel like if you're newer to something,
you're actually an advantage here.
Like you're coming to this problem with kind of like
a fresh mindset, and therefore like if the documentation
doesn't make sense to you, it's probably not going to make sense
to somebody else, and that's a really nice early contribution
to make.
And just in general, if you've got a specific maybe area
that you've got expertise, domain knowledge,
that's also a great place to go and kind of like use that
if there's a package that deals with that.
Okay.
So I think for me the really, really, really big question
about how to get involved was how to navigate social dynamics.
And this is a really tricky one, because as I said before,
every project is different and made up of quite different people
even kind of within the same project.
Now there's this quote that I really like actually.
So there's this book called Working in Public
by Nadia Agbal, and if you're interested in kind of
open source governance and how these things work,
I would definitely recommend it.
Really good book.
In the book, Nadia says,
open source is complicated because it contains a messy mix
of both technical and social norms,
most of which play out in public.
And I think this really gets to it for me.
It's figuring out how to kind of change something,
make a function, and that's one thing.
But just figuring out how to be this new person in this group
and kind of go in and not annoy people
and kind of just get things done,
that can be really tricky.
So one of the ways of overcoming this, I think,
is a lot of projects have kind of contributing guidelines
and documentation.
So this is kind of like a screenshot of a page
that I really, really like actually.
It's the Apache Software Foundation
kind of member participation guidelines.
And it goes into detail, even like the minute detail
of kind of like how to kind of phrase requests
to kind of make significant changes
to make it kind of as, I guess, as smoothly as possible.
They say this doesn't just apply
to Apache Software Foundation projects.
And it's definitely worth kind of skimming through these
if that's kind of a concern that you have yourself.
But then the other thing here, I think,
is like sometimes just embracing imposter syndrome.
Like you are new to this thing, and that's great.
But like if you were pretending to be somebody
that was there already, what would you do?
So the answer could be you can go and read
previous pull requests and previous issues
and look at the kind of things that people do.
So like every different package
is going to have something slightly different.
It's always good just to see what the conventions are
and to follow them.
I will say the one thing to kind of add to that
is as a new contributor, it's sometimes better
to err on the side of over-communicating
rather than under-communicating.
Because an established kind of contributor
might kind of need to say less to get something accepted.
But still, I found reading those previous PRs and issues
has been like super, super useful.
Okay.
Now, this is a really weird one for me.
Something I've noticed, and again,
this is very different between different projects,
but definitely on some,
there's this real difference in social norms
and quite stark differences
between what would come across a certain way in real life
versus kind of how things look in a pull request.
So to step back a second,
we've got these projects that have maybe got busy maintainers,
lots of different issues,
and there's a certain level of bluntness
that can appear rude,
but it's people just trying to get through issues
and just trying to get as much done as possible.
And I've definitely had to kind of come to terms
with this real duality
of kind of maybe seeing that kind of feedback
and getting it myself
and not taking it as rude or personal or anything like that
and just seeing it for what it is.
But at the same time, actually not necessarily engaging
in that communication style too much myself
because I don't like it.
And just because it's a normal thing,
it doesn't mean I have to do it.
But again, I can still exist in that world,
and that is fine.
So kind of my third question then
was what does the process of getting a pull request
actually look like?
And this is another one where I've really had to kind of change my,
I guess, the way that I view these kind of things.
So previously,
I kind of viewed it a bit like an essay.
So you're in school, you do an essay,
you do your work, you check it,
you hand it in to somebody,
and then you wait a bit and you get it back,
and you've got some kind of mark that's an indication
of your skill or competence.
That is really not a good way to look at a pull request.
You will have a bad time if you do that.
And the reason for that is
a pull request is more like a conversation
than an essay.
The back and forth and suggestions for changing things
and taking a different approach,
that is part of one of the best things
about getting involved in open source.
That is when you are really learning.
That is when you're getting feedback from people
that are probably quite experienced at this
to improve things.
So yeah, definitely not treating it like an essay.
And I think another thing kind of around
this kind of pull request kind of approach
as well is I've found
that coming from a background where I've been working
in kind of consultancy and a bit of software engineering
on proprietary projects,
working on open source libraries
is a completely different thing
in some really subtle ways.
And this is something that I summarize
as a task-oriented versus code-oriented approach.
So when I was a consultant,
I would be working
building things with libraries.
So the focus there is getting tasks done.
You might be building an app for a user
that needs to do a certain thing as part of their day job.
You might have a known set of users
or at least some of them you could maybe go
sit down with them and see how they'd normally do that task.
And it makes it a bit easier really
to kind of see what they're likely to do
and what they're not likely to do.
And you can kind of get away with only testing
kind of like certain paths.
In these circumstances,
dependencies can be a lot less important.
You can add in new packages and it not be a big deal.
And you might be the only maintainer
or part of a small team.
So you can kind of do things however you want
as long as it works.
But this is completely different now
working in open source libraries.
Your users and your tasks are mostly unknown
which means you have to be really rigorous
with your testing and even kind of preventing
paths that you think no one will ever take
or testing things that you think no one will ever use
actually does become quite important.
There's often kind of a need
to really avoid adding extra dependencies here.
But that can lead to really good things.
So I think sometimes
it can be easy to say, right,
let's just use this other one or a bit from both.
But when you're working on kind of open source libraries,
you kind of can't do that.
But that forces you then
to learn to work with the tools that you've got in front of you
and learn that kind of last 10%
of a library to get tasks done.
And I think, again, that's been something
that's been really valuable for me.
And also just this idea that you're writing code
that isn't kind of your code.
This is to be maintained by kind of maybe yourself
but other people in the community.
And that means you can't have
these maybe weird idiosyncrasies
or kind of code smells.
You've got to be a bit more strict
about these kind of things.
And I think just kind of realizing
that it's a really different kind of mindset
between these two things
kind of makes it a bit easier to accept
what kind of might seem like pedantry sometimes
but it's actually for a really good purpose.
But actually,
this isn't even the right question.
You could submit a pull request
to a project
and it might not get accepted.
And that could be a good thing.
You could try to implement something
that doesn't quite work
but it exposes something else in the package
that actually needs changing and updating.
And that's a helpful contribution.
You've figured something out
that can make the software better.
And actually, I think the question should be
how do I make a meaningful contribution?
Because actually, when I think about it,
I feel really good about the code
that I've kind of contributed towards
because I think some of my most meaningful
open source contributions have nothing to do with code.
I love writing blog posts
when I've learned something that I found difficult
and then somebody else is like,
yeah, no, that makes sense to me now, finally.
I love improving documentation
and taking that kind of beginner's mindset.
Even tweeting about a bit of functionality
that is not well advertised
and somebody's suddenly like,
I can now achieve something with that.
I feel like that's kind of meaningful.
So to summarize then,
it's about people.
There isn't a single open source community.
There's a lot of different sub-communities within things.
And there's no one-size-fits-all approach
to saying you should do this here
or you should behave like that in that way.
It's about kind of just figuring it out
for the thing that you're actually looking at at the time.
I think,
especially maybe as a new and more nervous person,
just find communities that you want to be part of
and want you to be part of them.
Also, just remember
everybody is new at some point
and once you have done the work of reading the guidelines
and kind of a few previous pull requests
and approaches,
after that there's a point at which you just have to jump right in
and go for it and then welcome
that kind of code review conversation.
But as much as I'm talking about code now,
open source contributions
are about way more than just code
and that is definitely something to keep in mind.
Okay, thank you.
Applause
Music